---
authors: Martin Hinz and Joe Roe
authors_short: Hinz, M. & Roe, J.
title: "XRONOS: Empowering Macroscale Archaeology Through Comprehensive Chronometric Data Management"
conference: "Computer Applications & Quantitative Methods in Archaeology (CAA), Auckland"
date: 2024-04-12
year: 2024
month: 4
---

## Abstract

In recent years, there has been a resurgence of interest in macroarchaeology, leading to a renewed focus on the profound questions surrounding the long duree of the complex interplay between people, their environment and cultural developments. This endeavour is inevitably data-driven, and in order to explore large temporal and geographical scales, concerted action to collect and share data on a large scale is essential. Computational archaeology has benefited significantly from the increasing adoption of open data and open science principles, influenced by developments in neighbouring disciplines, particularly the palaeosciences with their large-scale research frameworks. A key area where these principles have proved very effective is in the field of chronometric data.

In macroarchaeology, chronology remains central to understanding the dynamics of prehistoric developments within coupled socio-ecological systems. In recent years, creative and innovative approaches have emerged to use data beyond their conventional role as temporal markers, with radiometric data becoming a cornerstone for the intensification and implementation of macroarchaeology.

While comprehensive compilations of radiocarbon data have become accessible to different parts of the world over the past decade, several initiatives, including the c14bazAAR retrieval tool (Schmid et al. 2019), the IntChron exchange format (Bronk Ramsey et al. 2019) and the p3kc14 synthetic database (Bird et al. 2022), aim to bring these data together on a global scale. However, these efforts are far from complete. For a holistic understanding of prehistory, it is essential to explore the cultural dimensions of human evolution on a broader scale and to increase the significance of the archaeological record. Radiocarbon records remain extremely sparse in many regions of the world, and even in regions with extensive coverage, data quality shows considerable variation and lacks adequate documentation. A central repository to ensure the long-term sustainability and completeness of these datasets does not exist. Furthermore, the potential of incorporating other sources of chronometric information, such as dendrochronology and typological dating, into an open data framework remains largely untapped.

In response to these challenges and in synergy with existing initiatives, we are pleased to introduce XRONOS (https://xronos.ch). XRONOS is a dynamic, web-based platform for managing chronometric data from archaeological contexts worldwide. It combines an open data archive with advanced tools for importing, curating and analysing data from a wide range of sources. Beyond data aggregation, XRONOS strives to become a hub for community-wide data sharing and linking, while actively participating in the development of recognised standards to ensure interoperability.

XRONOS is guided by the following main objectives.

* Unifying Diverse Data Sources: The platform's primary mission is to consolidate all available sources of radiocarbon and other chronometric data into a single, cohesive database.
* Data Quality Enhancement: XRONOS is committed to developing robust tools for the continuous ingestion and refinement of this data.
* FAIR Data Dissemination: The platform aspires to disseminate this data within an open and FAIR framework, seamlessly embedding it within the broader universe of Linked Open Data, extending far beyond archaeology.

This presentation provides a detailed insight into the conceptual and technical infrastructure that will be developed under XRONOS for the period 2019-2023. This infrastructure includes the following:

* Versatile Data Model: Tailored to accommodate site and radiocarbon information, with the flexibility to extend to other forms of chronometric data.
* Data Ingestion Pipeline: Utilizing R and Ruby, XRONOS has established a robust pipeline for the ongoing ingestion of data from a variety of sources.
* Data Quality Improvement Protocols: Implementation of continuous, semi-automated data cleaning procedures to elevate data quality.
* User-Friendly Interface and API: XRONOS features a user-friendly Ruby-on-Rails application, providing a web-based frontend for data access, accompanied by a REST API for programmatic data retrieval.
* R Package Integration: An R package has been developed to facilitate seamless interfacing with the API.

The XRONOS framework represents a significant advance, providing a more accessible, reliable and comprehensive way to access chronometric data compared to previous resources.  It provides a solid foundation for the continued growth and improvement of macroarchaeology. As an open science and open source initiative, we invite all colleagues to actively participate in shaping the future course of XRONOS. We envision XRONOS acting as a catalyst for the application of quantitative and computational methods, not only in deciphering archaeological chronologies, but also in broader applications, making it a central data hub for the sustainable integration of chronometric data into ongoing efforts in macroarchaeology. The creation of a community-driven chronometric database will be instrumental in democratising these records for macro-level archaeology and ensuring their ability to shed light on the grand trajectories of the past.

## References
* Bird, Darcy, Lux Miranda, Marc Vander Linden, Erick Robinson, R. Kyle Bocinsky, Chris Nicholson, José M. Capriles, et al. 2022. “p3k14c, a Synthetic Global Database of Archaeological Radiocarbon Dates.” Scientific Data 9 (1): 27. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-022-01118-7.
* Bronk Ramsey, Christopher, Maarten Blaauw, Rebecca Kearney, and Richard A Staff. 2019. “The Importance of Open Access to Chronological Information: The IntChron Initiative.” Radiocarbon 61 (5): 1121–31. https://doi.org/10. 1017/RDC.2019.21.
* Schmid, Clemens, Dirk Seidensticker, and Martin Hinz. 2019. “c14bazAAR: An R Package for Downloading and Preparing C14 Dates from Different Source Databases.” Journal of Open Source Software 4 (43): 1914. https: //doi.org/10.21105/joss.01914.
